6. Application to reliability of free associations
*** Because of distribution overlap, and random sampling assumption, reliability is less than perfect.
*** meta-analysis of test-retest results from late 1960s
*** model predictions
*** possible sources of repeat rates at intervals < 1 year

One of the implications of Figure 1 is that free associations are not very reliable.  On one presentation of the cue word, a random value is drawn from each distribution and the maximum of those values determines the response selected for output.  On a second presentation of the cue word, there is a good chance that the new set of random values and the distributions they represent will not be perfectly correlated with the original set of values.  Thus, the new maximum will represent a different distribution and a different response word will be selected.  Because the distributions in Figure 1 are identical, the degree of unreliability will be determined by the distances between distribution means.

The unreliability inherent in the model illustrated in Figure 1 is somewhat surprising because we have been able to replicate free association probabilities for many of the cue words in the Nelson et al. association norms (e.g., Maki, 2007a).  This apparent discrepancy motivated our search for studies of free association reliability.  Several papers were published on this matter in the late 1960s and early 1970s (but have not been cited since).  Notably, Mackenzie (1972) showed that the pattern of free association probabilities for a given cue word can be quite reliable even though individual subjects' responses may change from test to retest.  By building the database of ui values, we have already shown that the choice model reproduces the free association probabilities quite accurately.  Here we address how well the model predicts UNreliability in studies of test-retest reliability.

Mackenzie's (1972) 283 undergraduates wrote single responses to each of 126 cue words; the association test was repeated 2 weeks later.  Mackenzie reported that patterns of free association probabilities matched almost perfectly from test to retest.  The patterns of association probabilities were compared using the cosine measure for each cue word; the cosines averaged 0.94.  The proportion of identical associations, p(IA), is another way of examining reliability and was used in the earlier test-retest studies (reviewed below); for Mackenzie's 126 cues, p(IA) averaged only 0.33.  Thus Mackenzie simultaneously showed that free association data are highly reliable in the aggregate but are quite UNreliable at the level of individual subjects and items.  

Mackenzie provided p(IA) values for each of 10 cue words ranging from 0.20 to 0.94.  We computed the p(IA) predicted from the choice model for each of those cues.  In the simulation, for each cue word the ui distributions were sampled twice.  The maximum value in each test determined which response was selected.  If the two responses agreed, then and identical association was recorded.  Simulation details follow.  For a given value u and a random value of p in Eq. 3 (again ignoring b), we can solve for x.  In vector form,
X=U-ln(-ln(P))/a ::: Equation 4
where U is the vector of theoretical mean strengths for a given cue word, P is the vector of random probabilities drawn for each simulated test, and X is the vector of randomly sampled values from each distribution.  The response word corresponding to the maximum value of X was selected for output.  The procedure was repeated for the simulated retest.  An "identical associate" event was tallied if the two response words matched.  The simulated test-retest was repeated 10,000 times for each cue word and the probability of an identical associate was computed.   The p(IA) values obtained by Mackenzie and those predicted by the choice model are listed in Table 2.  The predicted and observed values are quite close, r = 0.966.  

We used the same procedures to compute p(IA) values for all 4,393 cue words in the modified association norms.  One version of the simulation included the residual probabilities for each cue; the other version excluded residual probabilities.  For all cue words, the averages were 0.233 (residuals included) and 0.265 (residuals excluded).  Both values are substantially below the 0.33 reported by Mackenzie for his set of 126 cues.  An examination of other test-retest studies from the 1960s provides an explanation for this discrepancy.

Table 3 lists the p(IA) values reported by nine test-retest reliability studies (including Mackenzie, 1972).  The studies are sorted (in ascending order) by the test-retest interval in weeks.  The highest p(IA) values, 0.62 and 0.48, were obtained with a 1-week interval; the lowest value, 0.28, was obtained with a 52-week interval.  The corelation between p(IA) and the log interval (log10 weeks) was -0.743.  That linear relationship is plotted in Figure 2.  Also plotted are projections of our two simulated values, 0.23 and 0.26, onto the regression line (horizontal dotted lines).  The projection allows determination of the range of test-retest intervals predicted by the model (vertical dotted lines): 38.5 to 63.6 weeks.  

As it is presently constituted, the choice model simulates a test-retest study with two independent random draws; thus the model has no memory at the time of retest.  The fact that the observed p(IA) values shown in Figure 2 start well above the simulated values and decline gradually over test-retest interval suggests some additional, perhaps memory-based process that acts to promote persistent responding across two successive tests.  What that process may be, and whether it involves implicit or explicit recollection, is beyond the scope of the present research.  At any rate, both the observed data and the model's predictions suggest low asymptotic p(IA) occurring at a test-retest interval of about one year. (Footnote 3)

Footnote 3.  In a review of a previous manuscript (February 8, 2007), an anonymous reviewer argued that "... individual subjects might have highly stable (non-variable) association spaces that happen not to correspond perfectly with association norms"  but then went on to elevate this speculation by adding "... this *fact*, taken by itself, is sufficient to account for the shallow slope of the [JAM function]" (italics added).  This view implies high level of test-retest reliability; "non-variable" association spaces must lead to high p(IA) values.  To the contrary, the literature from the 1960s and 1970s indicates a low degree of test-retest reliability at the item level.  Unfortunately, this literature appears to be not at all known to contemporary scholars judging from the negligible citation rates.

